Hey, where is my 72-year-old couple?
They're not here tonight.
Amen.
When you said that, it gave me a sweet memory.
I'm old enough, and some of you are as well,
to remember when Paul Harvey was daily on the radio.
And I used to really enjoy listening to him.
And once a week, or maybe a couple times a week,
he had what he called the Tournament of Roses.
And he would announce a couple, maybe,
it seemed to me they were always from the Midwest or the Heartland
somewhere, that had been married for 70 or more years.
And I think, on Paul Harvey's show,
I think the longest I heard was 72 years.
But then I was sitting in Charlotte,
it's been two years ago, listening to the local news
trying to catch the weather.
And they brought on an interest of local interest.
And they were celebrating Dewey and D.B. Williams.
And they had been married 82 years, both of them
over 100 years old.
And they asked Dewey, they said, what
is the secret for a marriage that lasts 82 years?
And he was a godly fellow.
And he said, keep Christ in the middle
and do what she says.
I thought, that's pretty close to just what it takes.
Amen.
Well, it's good to be here tonight.
And I trust you had a great day.
It's been a beautiful day.
And now let's see what the Lord has to say for us, or say to us.
I invite you to turn to Psalm 66.
Psalm 66, a familiar couple of verses,
I think essential for our thinking tonight.
Psalm 66, and let's just read starting with verse 18.
The Bible says, if I regard iniquity in my heart,
the Lord will not hear me.
But verily God hath heard me.
He hath attended to the voice of my prayer.
Blessed be the God which hath not turned away my prayer,
nor his mercy from me.
Let's pray.
Father, I thank you for the day you've
given us, the beauty of it.
Thank you for this good group of people,
the sweetness of this fellowship.
Lord, we come before you tonight confessing our need of you
to speak to us.
Lord, I pray that your Holy Spirit would minister to us.
I pray that none would be offended,
that all would take these moments as a time
to look into our own hearts.
Father, would you use this time, and would you
help us to be more pleasing and fruitful in our walk with thee?
We pray in Jesus' name, amen.
I always like to give an introduction
to my introduction when I preach this message.
I haven't preached it a lot, because I can't
preach it everywhere I go.
But I will preach it to you tonight.
I know who I'm speaking to tonight.
I'm speaking to the cream of the crop of Fellowship Baptist
Church.
I'm preaching to people that will come out
on a Sunday evening because they want to hear the word of God,
and because they want God to do something in their hearts
and with their lives.
So if at any time tonight I sound as if I'm scolding,
I'm not scolding.
I'm not at all trying to be harsh.
I just know that we are sincere about our desire
to be what God wants us to be.
We so often talk about revival.
Matter of fact, sometimes we talk so much about revival
that in some ways it loses its meaning.
I don't mean to be critical of what anyone else does
or whatever else happens.
But I, from time to time, hear about a revival
on a college campus.
And I hope there is revival on college campuses.
But it tends to be when I look into what they're
talking about, they're talking about people being baptized
but by people who don't have authority to baptize
and calling baptism revival.
And what maybe they're responding to
is the emotionalism of some kind of concert or emotionalism
to a crisis of the moment.
And I'm not, again, please don't hear
me trying to be hypercritical.
I'm just saying that we use the term revival so much
that sometimes we just make it into an emotional thing
when there's not much that lives past the moment, the day,
or the week.
Every revival that I have ever heard of
or have personally experienced, you say, preacher,
have you experienced revival?
Yes, I have.
But every revival that I have heard of that I think
is legitimate and that I have experienced
starts with prayer.
I don't see revivals that start in halls with great crowds.
I see that as where revivals go.
Revivals start when people, from their own heart
and their own need, get right with God
and are on praying ground and begin to ask
God to work in their hearts.
I've been a pastor for a long time,
and I've preached on prayer many, many times
and tried to help people develop a plan of praying.
And all the things that that entails, I keep a prayer
journal, and I journal much of what I ask God for
and much of what God says to me.
And I say to him, I think it's good to have a plan of prayer.
I try to pray every day at a certain time
in a certain program, because I need to be lashed to that.
I am a man who, I think I was born with ADHD, whatever it is.
And I have to lash myself to a program.
I have to make myself be there, and otherwise my mind
wanders and so on.
You say, what are you saying all this for?
Well, as important as the plan is, and it is important,
it is not the most important thing.
We can have the greatest journal and the greatest plan
for praying.
We can lash ourselves to a discipline of a schedule
and go there and pray.
But I'm telling you, if we get there
with a heart that has something in it that
blocks God from hearing, then all of our plan
and all of our discipline are simply a way
that we can check a personal box that says,
look how good you did.
And I think if we were honest, when it all comes down
to it, what actually we need to focus on as believers who
do love the Lord, who are here because we
want to serve the Lord, is we maybe for a while
need to stop seeing the wrong in the world.
And man, is there a lot to see.
And stop examining everyone else's heart and motive
and life, and maybe just say, what about my heart?
Is there something limiting in my heart?
I think it's important to understand
that when God says, if someone regards an iniquity,
he will not hear me.
I want you to understand that word here.
It's an important Hebrew word.
I'm not trying to impress by knowing a Hebrew word.
I'm trying to get across to you, it is the word shama.
And the Hebrew had a very different understanding
of what it was to hear than we necessarily
in our culture today.
We concentrate on the audible hearing,
and then we'll discern if we want to do what we heard.
But the Hebrew knew that in your relationship with God,
you didn't listen and then decide.
You listened with the intention of doing what God said.
And God is reversing it now.
And he is saying, I will hear you.
But if there is sin, if there's iniquity
that you're regarding in your heart,
I won't be moved by your prayer.
Someone says, does God hear me?
Yeah, God hears you.
But God may not be inclined to answer in that way
or in that moment because we have regarded
iniquity in our heart.
The surest way to a powerless prayer life
is to regard iniquity.
iniquity in our heart. John Bunyan, who was the author of Pilgrim's Progress, he was a
writer and journaler, he wrote this in his journal one time, prayer is a shield to the
soul, a sacrifice to God, and a scourge to Satan. True statement. Sometime after that,
a matter of weeks after that, he came back to his journal and he added this line to that
one, prayer will make a man cease from sin, but sin will make a man cease from prayer.
I wonder if our prayer lives are anemic, not because we don't have a plan, not because
we lack knowledge of how to pray, not because we don't have discipline to at least fulfill
the function, I wonder if our prayer lives are anemic in many cases because we have a
limiting part in our heart. Consider it. What is it to accept sin, or what is it to regard
iniquity in my heart? Let me say this at the outset. There will never be a day when I bow
my knee before the Lord and pray that I will not have sin in my heart. Okay? I'm not trying to
confess my sin to you, I'm not trying to make, I'm not trying to be humble publicly, I'm just
telling you the truth. I'm a sinner. And since I've been saved, I still am a sinner. And the
reason I feel okay telling you that is because I know you. And whether you would ever want to
admit it, you're a sinner like I'm a sinner. There is never a day when I don't wait and say,
God, I think I can pray today because I've been really good. On my best day, I don't deserve to
go before God. And on my worst day, I don't deserve to go before God. I'm not saying to you,
if you're a sinner and you somehow have not come to the state of sinless perfection. You know,
that is a doctrine that our world, some in our world observe, not so many today as before. But
they thought that you could become so holy that you no longer committed sin in your life in this
body. Not happening. We will be sinlessly perfect someday when we are in the presence of the Lord in
heaven. Alright? I'm not saying that if you sin, that you shouldn't even bother to pray. Now,
listen, we are to keep short lists of our sins. We are to confess our sins as we recognize our
sin. We are to have morning times of confession, daily through the day times of confession,
evening. What I try to do is reflect on how bad I did that day. And before I pillow my head,
be honest with God and seek His forgiveness. As we see the sin, we are to confess. We are
to keep short lists of sin. But I'm just telling you, there's been days when I might have forgotten
one or missed one. Or ten. Or a hundred. I'm not saying don't bother praying unless you're
sinlessly perfect. None of us would ever be on praying ground. No, no. That's not what God is
saying. To regard iniquity in my heart is something very different. Then what is it,
preacher? It is this. It is allowing the sin to stay in my heart. It is seeing it,
acknowledging its presence, contemplating it, maybe even in some way insincerely noting and
confessing it. But it is not clearing that sin out of my heart. It's not a stumbling into sin.
It's not a mistake I made. It is that I have seen it and I have allowed it to stay in my heart.
It even has the concept of agreeing with it. When I regard iniquity, I see it. I know it's
there. I allow it to stay there because somehow, I don't know, I say stuff like this. Well,
God understands it's just who I am. You have to understand, preacher, my mom was this way.
My dad was this way. You have to understand, preacher, it's just who I am. I don't mean for
it to be bad. It's just who I am. We have a new one now. If you've seen the commercials,
God gets us. That's another way of saying, you're okay. Don't worry about it. God gets me. I know
I just berated my wife with my temper. I know I just lashed out at her with my tongue, but it's
who I am. I'll get over it, and I'll tell her I'm sorry, and it'll be okay. But it's not okay.
Well, it's just, you have to understand, preacher, I was born like this, and man,
I've been like this for so long. And here's my message to you thus far. Stop being that way.
God gave us the Holy Spirit to stop being that way. And we will never stop being that way until
we stop excusing ourselves for being that way. And it's not okay with God that it's how you've
always been. And it's not okay that you'll get over it in a minute. And it's not okay that it's
who you are, and everybody just has to understand. No, they don't. And God doesn't understand. And
it is a serious matter. It's a tragedy when our deceitful hearts convince us that godly living
is consistent with us approving our sin. And that's a heavy statement. You do remember our
hearts, don't you? They're deceitfully wicked. They're desperately wicked. And yet we can
convince our sin, yes, I know that's in there. Yes, I know that I react that way. Yes, I know
this, that, and the other. But, you know, it's just who I am. And man, I love God, and God's
using me. Stop it. You see, the tragedy is this. The longer sin stays, the more it spoils. It starts
by spoiling my personal walk with the Lord. Devotions become empty. Prayer becomes dry. I am
convinced that a lot of folks do not feel the necessity or lay out the time for prayer because
they know that limitation is already in their heart. It begins to affect our church life. It
makes preaching not as good and not as interesting. Our giving and serving become drudgery, not
living and exciting. Eventually it works its way into our perspective at home, and everything is
colored by it. It works its way into our marriage. It works its way into our relationship. We become
cynical, negative. We excuse ourselves, and thus we have to criticize the world, judge the world.
No sin can be accepted and approved in a believer's life. What we have become in this
generation is incredibly good at making it someone else's fault. Yeah, I know I'm the way I am, but
you have to understand it's not my fault. I love to point out in this verse, notice verse 18 again,
three words, I'll emphasize them. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.
I, my, me. It is not someone else's fault that you have a limiting quality in your heart. It's not
what somebody did to you that you have a limiting quality in your heart. Accepting and approving
sin is not what is done to you. It is what you do to yourself. It's in your heart. Not only is it in
my heart, but because it's in my heart, sometimes I can hide it. Sometimes I can kind of disguise it
and masquerade it, and I think that somehow I can get away with it because it's down in the deep
recesses of my heart. I often think of David after he committed that horrible sin with Bathsheba.
And after he went through the deceitfulness with Uriah, the horrible command to Joab to
retreat from Uriah at the wall and let him be killed, how he went when that was a
accomplished and brought Bathsheba into his home, and
oh, wise and righteous David, sweet singer of Israel,
marries her. Oh, he did all the things to make
himself look good, but all the time in his heart
he knows. He knows.
Oh, he still went to Tabernacle. He still
led. He still sang his songs. He even wrote some, but if you
look at the ones that he wrote while he was hiding that sin and
acting as if it wasn't there, they are painful psalms where
he talks about rotting from the inside out.
Now please, don't misunderstand what I'm saying.
No one here
is guilty of such horrible sin as David in adultery,
murder, and so the like.
But as David was willing to try
to cover it, so are we sometimes trying to cover it,
willing to try and cover it. And we're so willing for it to be
what somebody else did to us. Well, you have to understand, preacher, I
wouldn't be like this but my dad. I wouldn't be like this but
my youth pastor. I wouldn't be like this but my wife. And we can go
on and on and on, but when God says it,
when he says it's your heart, it's your iniquity,
it's your limited prayer life, stop making it
everybody else and stop trying to act
like it's not there. And stop trying to act
like we can lead godly, powerful lives
for the Lord when we know it's there.
What's the result?
Well, the consequences are very simple.
God is unmoved.
God, when we pray, is unmoved.
God wants to work on our behalf. He wants to
show himself mighty for us. However, when we approve
of sin in our hearts and we disapprove of God,
God will not work in the way that we ask because it would
be him approving of our sin.
I hope that's easy to see.
Prayer is unheard. The Lord will not hear me. When I go and I pray
for my child, as desperate as
I am and as great as the crisis might be,
my limiting heart may keep God
from working. When I pray
for my ministry, when I pray for my health, when I pray for my job,
man, I don't want to have in the back of my mind, boy,
I really need God to work, but man, I've got this.
That's why we don't pray. That's why we don't
see the answers because we know before we say, oh God,
we know we've kept it right where
we can find it.
Say, preacher, we don't like you tonight.
We liked you a little this morning. We don't
like you tonight. Well, you don't have to do
any of this, but please stop talking about
revival.
Please stop acting as if
we can make God over into our image and we can tell
God what He should accept about us and we can tell God how He should
leave us and we can tell God what we will allow Him to mess with and what we won't
allow Him to mess with.
Because when we regard iniquity,
when we accept it as who we are and
we're satisfied, God says I'm unmoved.
What are you talking about, preacher?
Are you accusing us of being wicked, horrible people?
No, I'm not. But I am saying this,
that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
And whether we like to accept
that as true, oh, we know it's a spiritual principle and it's true
in everyone else's life, but it's not, God understands,
not true in my life. That little thing where I
hold on to it and it limits God, well, it's just not true in my, yes, it is true
in your life. A little leaven does
change your entire life.
I am told
that cancer starts as one single
cell. I am not a scientist. I don't know if that's true,
but I'm preaching, so stay out of my message.
One single cell. And what if we had
such great technology that with a simple test
you could discern you have that one single cell.
We did a scan. We know where it is. We can get that
out before it divides and multiplies. Let us get that
out. And our answer would be,
it's just who I am.
God understands. It's just who I am.
Not one of us would say that.
We would say, today, get it out of me.
Because we know the debilitating effect
of that one cell. We know it starts small.
We know we could deal with it today. We probably could deal with it next year.
We know that in five years we might be noticing symptoms, but
maybe not. But if we knew it was there, and we knew
the course it would take, that it would leaven the whole
lump, we would say, get
it out of me now.
But we are so casual
about sin, what God
calls sin, that we
feel entitled to hold onto it.
Or we feel powerless to get rid of it.
Or we've grown comfortable
with having it. And God says, listen,
I will forgive sin. I will
forgive sinners. I will change you and grow you
and help you. But if you purposely
hold onto your sin,
you've limited anything I can do in your life.
You say, preacher, what are you talking about?
I'm talking about people who have held
a grudge for 20,
30, 40 years. I'll never forget
my wife and I were visiting in the intensive care unit. We were out talking
to a wife. Her husband was in ICU. They were doing something so we couldn't be in there
at that moment. She started telling us about something that
had happened. And boy, I mean, she was getting just really
upset about it. And her face was getting red. And it was
something that she was wronged. I mean, somebody
legitimately did something wrong. And as a pastor, I'm thinking, man, I've got to correct
that. And I said, when did that happen?
And her answer to me was 40 years
ago.
And there are people that feel justified in holding onto
that hurt. There are people who feel
justified holding onto that hate.
And they feel justified because it was done to them.
And they didn't lash out, but it was done to them. And they may not have reacted
to it at that moment, but they've held it until it has now
gone down into their very being, a root of bitterness.
And they carry it with them. And please don't tell me
it doesn't mean anything. It colors every perspective
they have.
But it's just who they are. Stop it.
There are people in this room
who have anger issues,
temper issues. They lash out
on the road. They come in the house
and lash out in the house. They lash out at people they work with.
They damage their relationship with their spouse. They damage their
relationship with their children. They're aggravated at everybody at church.
They say things they're sometimes keeping it a little more Christian.
They feel justified because they get over it.
But what they have done in the doing of that
anger and that temper is destroyed part of a
relationship. And then their expectation is that everybody should just
get over it. You don't have a right to be that angry.
You don't have a right to have that kind of temper.
You don't have a right to say those things
to people you love. And you don't have a right to excuse yourself
because your dad was like that or excuse yourself because of
what somebody did to you first. You don't have the right to hold on
to that.
that you are God's child, and when you excuse yourself, God says you've got to deal with it.
More so men, but becoming more so women. We live in a lustful generation. There are men that can't
live a day without being consumed with lust. Yeah, preacher, you gotta understand, I'm a man. Yeah,
you're God's man. And it's not okay. It's not okay to be consumed with that. And listen,
if you think it is consistent to be consumed with lust and live a godly life as a husband,
as a church member, as a servant of God, they don't coexist. Stop excusing it. Stop holding
on to it. You say I've tried. Try again to get rid of it. Get help. But we so limit what God
can do with us. We so limit how we can speak to God, and God can speak to us when we hold those
things, and we know they're there. Oh, we're still marching off with our psalms. We're still at
church. We're still teaching our class. We know it's there, and I can go on for hours. Jealousy,
envy, people eaten up with the lack of contentment with what God has done in their life. They go to
church and see somebody else blessed. Somebody else gets to sing the solo they don't get to.
Somebody else is appreciated. I've literally had people say, Pastor, you shook so-and-so's hand.
You never shook my hand. That's the reason. No, I would never say that. Stop it. That's
making yourself so important that you place yourself above anything and everything else.
You say, well, that's not really a sin. Go ask God if that's a sin. Go ask God if the
pride and the self-will and selfishness. Ask God if he's pretty concerned about that. Stop
excusing it. Rebellion against parents. Well, it's just the normal stage. I'm this age. Stop.
It's not okay with God. God's first promise to a child was that he would obey and honor
his parents. He made promises about that. That's not a little thing to God. You say,
well, I don't voice it. Well, do you have it in your heart? That's where we're talking about it
being. Like a sack of submission from a wife. Well, my husband, he's just—stop. God's not
okay with that. Well, as a husband, he doesn't love her like Christ loved the church, but I mean,
he does provide. Stop it. Our responsibility to our wives does not stop with a paycheck,
for goodness sake. We are to love them and treat them like Christ loved the church,
and sir, you may not excuse yourself out of that. I'm just telling you it's those little
things. Oh, preacher, I don't smoke. I don't drink. I don't even chew tobacco. I made it.
I'm a good Christian. Hey, long ago when I got saved, I did all—I didn't chew tobacco. I did
the rest of those things, and I was so proud of myself when I stopped cussing, and stopped drinking,
and stopped smoking. I thought, man, I've arrived. And then God said to me, now we're just starting
on the hard stuff. And now I've been saved since 1975, and you know what? We are down to the hard
stuff. And I've got stuff that I want to accept. I say, look how much I've served you. Look how
much I've tried to help others. Look at how much I've studied. Look at how much—preacher, God,
you just ought to leave me alone on this. And God says, no. No, we're on a journey here, Doc,
and it's not okay to leave it lay in your heart. No love for the lost. I know people that go to
church all of their lives and never one time genuinely care to try to tell somebody that's
lost that Jesus can save them. Hurt feelings. Prejudice. Prejudice. I was born and raised
up for Kentucky. That stuff has just acted like it's normal. It's not normal. It's not right.
Not generous. Not a tither. Not a giver. Not a sharer. You say, you done, preacher? I am done.
But I'm saying this. It really comes down to the hard stuff. It comes down to where God says to me,
hey, I see that. And that's a limiting factor in your life. And I'm not calling us horrible people.
I'm not. I'm saying to you at the beginning, I think we're the cream of the crop. And I wouldn't
preach it to people that weren't the cream of the crop because the rest, a lot of folks could care
less if they get any better. They could care less if they go any deeper. They care less if they
grow. But you and I, we've got to come to the place where we say, God, okay, we're down to the
hard stuff. Will you help me? And Lord, I'm confessing to you that that is in my life. That
that little thing that I like to excuse, that thing that the rest of the world would say,
that's not sin. That thing that is laying there and in there and there's so difficult for me to
deal with. God, would you help me? I don't want to limit my life in prayer. I don't want to know
it's there and claim to be consistent with everything you call godly. And I don't want
to go through the motions. Lord, I want you to help me get this iniquity out of my heart. Now,
let me end with this. Look at verse 19. But verily God hath heard me. You know what the
psalmist is saying? I was in a bad way. I had some bad stuff going on in my life. I had stuff
that I was approving. I had stuff that I was hiding. But God got a hold of my heart. I confessed it.
I got it out of my heart. And God now hears me. God hath heard me. He hath attended to the voice
of my prayer. Blessed be God which hath not turned away my prayer, get this, nor his mercy.
Man, the greatest blessing we have is God's mercy and long-suffering. God is patient with us and
brings us to moments and places in our life where we can re-engage and say, God, I know that is
there. Will you help me with that? I don't want it to be limiting. And mercifully, not giving us
what we deserve, God says, I'll help. I'll help you. The psalmist said, I've regarded iniquity in
my heart. I know what it is for God not to hear me. I know what it is for God not to be moved
when I need God to be moved. And I want that out of my life, but verily God hath heard me. Because
his mercy in my life moved me to the point where with his help I could forsake that sin that I
accepted as just who I am. Would you pray with me? Father, I pray that you'd speak to us tonight. I
know the people in this room love you. I know the people in this room want revival in their
own lives, in their own homes, in their church, and in this country. But I also know that we can
be so limiting because we accept things that aren't the big sins as acceptable in our life.
And Lord, if we truly want revival, if we really want to be in communication, to be led of the
Spirit, to be used in a great way in any way, it will only be when we stop allowing sin to stay,
stop approving sin as ours, stop accepting it's just a little one, and allow you to deal with us
and help it be removed from our lives. It's a process. It's hard. It's not a
an easy thing. We'll start and fail but God we will stop accepting it. We may start on
getting it out and forsaking it. We may fail but we will stop accepting it. And oh God
when we try and when we try to forsake and when we confess and when we work at it, you
and your mercy will hear us. So Lord I pray for believers. I don't think anyone in here
is an adulterer or a drunkard or a murderer but I do think there's people like me that
have stuff that's hard to get out and we hold on to it. Because it's so hard we start to
accept it not realizing how limiting it is. So Father you work. These people love you
and you love them. You work in the way you want. I pray you do it. In Jesus name. Amen.
As you stand our heads are bowed, our eyes are closed. I know this is a hard, hard invitation.
I know nobody wants somebody to think we're coming down for something evil. Don't worry
about what somebody thinks. Whatever is limiting deal with God about it and God will help you.
Did you come as the piano plays? God there are some things. Oh they're not sin in the
way the world sees sin. They're not big sin. But boy I know they're limiting. I know that
you're not pleased with them being there. And I don't want to hold on to them anymore.
God I may start and I may fail but I'm going to start. I don't want to be accepting of
them anymore. I'm just asking you Lord I'm real with you. It's tough. It's there. I'm
asking you will you help me empty those things from my heart. If a man regards iniquity in
his heart the Lord will not hear him. He won't be moved. Thank God. God hath heard my prayer.
It's God's mercy and long-suffering and spirit will help us get where we need to be. God help us.
Many have come. What about you?